---
layout: default
title: Python Warm Up
type: Homework
number: 00
active_tab: homework
release_date: 2023-01-18
due_date: 2023-01-23 23:59:00EDT

---

<!-- Check whether the assignment is ready to release -->
{% capture today %}{{'now' | date: '%s'}}{% endcapture %}
{% capture release_date %}{{page.release_date | date: '%s'}}{% endcapture %}
{% if release_date > today %} 
<div class="alert alert-danger">
Warning: this assignment is out of date.  It may still need to be updated for this year's class.  Check with your instructor before you start working on this assignment.
</div>
{% endif %}
<!-- End of check whether the assignment is up to date -->


<!-- Check whether the assignment is up to date -->
{% capture this_year %}{{'now' | date: '%Y'}}{% endcapture %}
{% capture due_year %}{{page.due_date | date: '%Y'}}{% endcapture %}
{% if this_year != due_year %} 
<div class="alert alert-danger">
Warning: this assignment is out of date.  It may still need to be updated for this year's class.  Check with your instructor before you start working on this assignment.
</div>
{% endif %}
<!-- End of check whether the assignment is up to date -->



{% if page.materials %}
<div class="alert alert-info">
You can download the materials for this assignment here:
<ul>
{% for item in page.materials %}
<li><a href="{{item.url}}">{{ item.name }}</a></li>
{% endfor %}
</ul>


<i>Remember to make a copy of the notebook into your own Drive by choosing “Save a Copy in Drive” from Colab’s “File” menu.</i>

</div>
{% endif %}





{{page.type}} {{page.number}}: {{page.title}} 
=============================================================

### Deadline: {{page.due_date}}



*credit: Jordan Boyd-Graber*

The goal of this assignment is for you to get practice with programming in Python. You will be writing code to determine whether a poem is a [limerick](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Limerick_(poetry)) or not. To do this, we will be using the [CMU pronunciation dictionary](http://www.speech.cs.cmu.edu/cgi-bin/cmudict) (which is covered in the [second chapter of the NLTK book](https://www.nltk.org/book/ch02.html). NLTK is a common python library used for text processing.).
You will also be using the NLTK library to tokenize text. 

> Note You will need to install nltk using `pip` and the `CMU pronunciation dictionary`. When you run `limerick.py`, you will see instructions on how to install the `CMU pronunciation dictionary` in python.

A limerick is defined as a poem with the form AABBA, where the A lines rhyme with each other, the B lines rhyme with each other (and not the A lines). (English professors may disagree with this definition, but that's what we're using here to keep it simple. There are also constraints on how many syllables can be in a line.)

## Pre-course survey (2 points)

Please fill out this short [survey](https://forms.gle/cEoRBX9Nf4WmT5av5). Your answers will help your instructor get to know you and learn what you hope to get out of this course. This will help me modify the course to best fit your interests.

## Programming (40 points)

Look at the file [limerick.py](https://cs.brynmawr.edu/cs383-cta/website/hws/hw00/limerick.py).  Your job is to fill
in the missing functions in that file so that it does what it’s
supposed to do.

* `num_syllables`: look at how many syllables a word has.  Implement this first. This will help you understand what the CMU dictionary data looks like.  You don't *need* to use it in implementing subsequent functions, but you can.
* `rhyme`: detect whether two words rhyme or not
* `limerick`: given a candidate limerick, return whether it meets the constraint or not.
More requirements / information appear in the source file.

**What does it mean for two words to rhyme?**  They should share the same sounds in their pronunciation except for their initial consonant sound(s).  (This is a very strict definition of rhyming.  This makes the assignment easier.)  If one word is longer than the other, then the sounds of shorter word (except for its initial consonant cluster) should be a suffix of the sounds of the longer.  To further clarify, when we say "one word is longer than the other", we are using number of phonemes as the metric, not number of syllables or number of characters.

**How do I know if my code is working?**  Run the provided unit tests provided in [tests.py](https://cs.brynmawr.edu/cs383-cta/website/hws/hw00/tests.py).  Initially, many of them will fail.  If your program is working correctly, all of them will pass.  However, the converse is not true: passing all the tests is not sufficient to demonstrate that your code is working.  *Using tests.py is strongly encouraged, this is similar to how your code will be graded on gradescope.*

**How do I separate words from a string of text?**  Use the `word_tokenize` function.

**What if a word isn’t in the pronouncing dictionary?** Assume it doesn’t rhyme with anything and only has one syllable.

**How ``hardened'' should the code be?** It should handle ASCII text with punctuation and whitespace in upper or lower case.

**What if a word has multiple pronunciations?**  If a word like “fire” has multiple pronunciations, then you should say
that it rhymes with another word if any of the pronunciations rhymes.

**What if a word starts with a vowel?**  Then it has no initial consonant, and then the entire word should be a
suffix of the other word.

**What about end rhymes?**  End rhymes are indeed a rhyme, but they make for less interesting
limericks.  So "conspire" and "fire" do rhyme.

**What about stress?**  The stresses of rhymes should be consistent.

**What if a word has no vowels?** Then it doesn't rhyme with anything.

### Extra Credit

Extra Credit (create new functions for these features; don’t put them
in the required functions that will be run by the autograder):

* Create a new function called
 `apostrophe_tokenize` that handles apostrophes in words correctly so
  that "can’t" would rhyme with "pant" if the `is_limerick` function used `apostrophe\_tokenize` instead of `word_tokenize`.
* Make reasonable guesses about the number of syllables in unknown words in a function called `guess_syllables`.
* Compose a funny original limerick about
  computational linguistics, natural language processing, or machine
  learning (add it to your submission as `limerick.txt`).
Add extra credit code as functions to the `LimerickDetector`
class, but don't interfere with required functionality.

## Feedback (3 points)
In a README file, called `README.txt`, answer the following questions:

1. How long did you spend on the assignment?
2. What did you learn by doing this assignment?
3. Briefly describe a Computational Text Analysis/Text as Data research question where it would be useful to be able to identify if a poem is a limerick or not (keep this answer to a maximum of 3 sentences).

Feel free to add additional/optional feedback, e.g. what did you like or dislike about the assignment?

## Submitting

Submit the following files to the assignment called `HW00` on Gradescope:

1. `limerick.py`
2. `README.txt` 

Make sure to name these files exactly what we specify here. Otherwise,
our autograders might not work and we might have to take points off.
